- [Command-line Environment](#command-line-environment)
  - [Job Control](#job-control)
    - [killing a process](#killing-a-process)
    - [Pausing and backgrounding processes](#pausing-and-backgrounding-processes)
  - [Terminal Multiplexers](#terminal-multiplexers)
    - [tmux](#tmux)
    - [Aliases](#aliases)
  - [Dotfiles](#dotfiles)
  - [Remote Machines](#remote-machines)

# Command-line Environment

## Job Control

### killing a process
Your shell is using a UNIX communication mechanism called a *signal* to communicate information to the process. signals are software interrupts.

example for captures `SIGINT` and ignores it.
```python
#!/usr/bin/python3
import signal, time

def handler(signum, time):
    print("\nI got a SIGINT, but I am not stopping")

signal.signal(signal.SIGINT, handler)
i = 0
while True:
    time.sleep(.1)
    print("\r{}".format(i), end="")
    i += 1
```

a more generic signal for asking a process to exit gracefully is the `SIGTERM` signal. 
```
kill -TERM <PID>
```

### Pausing and backgrounding processes
Signals can do other things beyond killing a process. 
`SIGSTOP` pauses a process. 

```
Ctrl-C    SIGINT
Ctrl-\    SIGQUIT
Ctrl-Z    SIGTSTP (i.e. the terminal’s version of SIGSTOP)
```

`fg` continue the paused job in the foreground
`bg` continue the paused job in the background,To background an already running program you can do `Ctrl-Z` followed by `bg`. backgrounded processes are still children processes of your terminal and will die if you close the terminal.

the`&`suffix in a command will run the command in the background

`nohup` (a wrapper to ignore SIGHUP)

## Terminal Multiplexers

### tmux

`tmux` allow you to multiplex terminal windows using panes and tabs so you can interact with multiple shell sessions. `tmux` is highly configurable and by using the associated keybindings you can create multiple tabs and panes and quickly navigate through them.

`tmux` expects you to know its keybindings, and they all have the form `<C-b> x `where that means
 (1) press `Ctrl+b`, 
 (2) release `Ctrl+b`, and then
 (3) press `x`. 
`tmux` has the following hierarchy of objects:

- Sessions: a session is an independent workspace with one or more windows.
  - `tmux` start a new session.
  - `tmux new -s NAME` starts it with that name.
  - `tmux ls` lists the current sessions.
  - Within `tmux` typing `<C-b> d ` detaches current session.
  - `tmux a` attaches the last session, you can use `-t` flag to specify which.
  
- Windows: Equivalant to tabs in editors or browsers, they are visually separate parts of the same session.
  - `<C-b> c ` creates a new windows, To close it you can just terminate the shells doing `<C-d>`
  - `<C-b> N` Go to the *N* th windows. Note they are numbered.
  - `<C-b> p` Goes to the previous window.
  - `<C-b> n` Goes to the next window.
  - `<C-b> ,` Rename the current window.
  - `<C-b> w` List current windows.

- Panes: Like vim splits, panes let you have multiple shells in the same visual display.
  - `<C-b> "` Split the current pane horizontally.
  - `<C-b> %` Split theturrent pane vertically.
  - `<C-b> <direction>` Move to the pane in the specified direction.
  - `<C-b> z` Toggle zoom for the current pane.
  - `<C-b> [` Start scrollback. You can then press `<space>` to start a selection and `<enter>` to copy that selection.
  - `<C-b> <space>` Cycle through pane arrangements.

some tutorial:

[a-quick-and-easy-guide-to-tmux](https://www.hamvocke.com/blog/a-quick-and-easy-guide-to-tmux/)

[Terminal Multiplexers](http://linuxcommand.org/lc3_adv_termmux.php)

### Aliases

an alias in bash has the following structure:
```shell
alias alias_name="command_to_alias arg1 arg2"
```

Aliases have many convenient features:
```shell
# Make shorthands for common flags
alias ll="ls -lh"

# Save a lot of typing for common commands
alias gs="git status"
alias gc="git commit"
alias v="vim"

# Save you from mistyping
alias sl=ls

# Overwrite existing commands for better defaults
alias mv="mv -i"       # -i prompts before overwrite
alias mkdir="mkdir -p" # -p make parent dirs as needed
alias df="df -h"       # -h prints human readable format

# Alias can be composed
alias la="ls -A"
alias lla="la -l"

# To ignore an alias run it prepended with \
\ls
# Or disable an alias altogether with unalias
unalias la

# To get an alias definition just call it with alias
alias ll
# Will print ll='ls -lh'

```

To make an alias persistent you need to include it in shell startup files, like `.bashrc` or `.zshrc`.

## Dotfiles



## Remote Machines
