- [Version Control(Git)](#version-controlgit)
  - [Git's data model](#gits-data-model)
    - [Snapshots](#snapshots)
    - [Modeling history: relating snapshots](#modeling-history-relating-snapshots)
    - [Data model, as pseudocode](#data-model-as-pseudocode)
    - [Objects and content-addressing](#objects-and-content-addressing)
    - [References](#references)
    - [Repositories](#repositories)
    - [Staging area](#staging-area)
    - [Git command-line interface](#git-command-line-interface)
      - [Basics](#basics)
      - [Branching and merging](#branching-and-merging)
      - [Remotes](#remotes)
      - [Undo](#undo)
      - [Advanced Git](#advanced-git)
    - [Miscellaneous](#miscellaneous)
    - [Resources](#resources)
    - [Exercises](#exercises)

# Version Control(Git)
Version control systems(VCSs) are tools used to track changes to source code (or other collections of files and folders).

## Git's data model

### Snapshots
In Git terminology, a file is called a "blob", and it's just a bunch of bytes.
A directory is called a "tree", and it maps names to blobs or trees.
A snapshot is the top-level tree that is being tracked.

The top-level tree contains two elements, a tree "foo" (that itself contains one element, a blob "bar.txt"), and a blob "baz.txt".
```
<root> (tree)
|
+- foo (tree)
|  |
|  + bar.txt (blob, contents = "hello world")
|
+- baz.txt (blob, contents = "git is wonderful")
```

### Modeling history: relating snapshots

In Git, a history is a directed acyclic graph(DAG) of snapshots.
All this means is that each snapshot in Git refers to a set of "parents", the snapshots that preceded it. It's a set of parents rather than a single parent.

Git calls these snapshots "commit"s. Visualizing a commit history might look something like this:
```
o <-- o <-- o <-- o
            ^
             \
              --- o <-- o
```
the `o`s correspond to individual commits (snapshots).

 In the future, these branches may be merged to create a new snapshot that incorporates both of the features, producing a new history that looks like this, with the newly created merge commit shown in bold:

```
o <-- o <-- o <-- o <---- o
            ^            /
             \          v
              --- o <-- o
```

### Data model, as pseudocode

```
// a file is a bunch of bytes
type blob = array<byte>

// a directory contains named files and directories
type tree = map<string, tree | blob>

// a commit has parents, metadata, and the top-level tree
type commit = struct{
    parents: array<commit>
    author: string
    message: string
}
```

### Objects and content-addressing

An "object" is a blob, tree, or commit
```
type object = blob | tree | commit
```

In Git data store, all objects are content-addressed by their `SHA-a hash`
```
objects = map<string, object>

def store(object):
    id = sha1(object)
    objects[id] = object

def load(id):
    return objects[id]
```

Blob, trees, and commits are unified in this way: they are all objects.

```
git cat-file -p 698281bc680d1995c5f4caaf3359721a5a58d48d
```

### References

References are pointers to commits. Unlike objects, which are immutable, reference are mutable. For example, the `master` reference usually points to the latest commit in the main branch of development.

```
references = map<string, string>

def update_reference(name, id):
    reference[name] = id

def read_reference(name):
    return references[name]

def load_reference(name_or_id):
    if name_or_id in references:
        return load(references[name_or_id])
    else:
        return load(name_or_id)
```

In Git, that "where we currently are" is a special reference called "HEAD"

### Repositories
`Git repository`: it is the data `objects` and `references`.

On disk, all Git stores are objects and references: that's all there is to Git's data model. All `git` commands map to some manipulation of the commit DAG by adding objects and adding/updating references.

e.g. "discard uncommited changes and make the 'master' ref point to commit `5d83f9e`", there's probably a command to do it(e.g. in this case, `git checkout master; git reset --hard 5d83f9e`)

### Staging area

Git allow you to specify which modifications should be included in the next snapshot through a mechanism called the "staging area".

### Git command-line interface

command reference: [Pro Git](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2)

#### Basics
- `git help <command>`: get help for a git command.
- `git init`: create a new git repo, with data stored in the `.git` diretory.
- `git status`: tells you what's going on.
- `git add <filename>`: add files to staging area.
- `git commit`: creates a new commit.
  [A Note About Git Commit Messages](https://tbaggery.com/2008/04/19/a-note-about-git-commit-messages.html)
  [How to Write a Git Commit Message](https://cbea.ms/git-commit/)
- `git log`: shows a flattened log of history.
- `git log --all --gragh --decorate`: visualizes history as a `DAG`.
- `git diff <filename>`: show changes you made relative to the stagig area.
- `git diff <revision> <filename>`: shows differences in a file between snapshots.
- `git checkout <revision>`: updates `HEAD` and current branch.
  
#### Branching and merging

- `git branch`: shows branches.
- `git branch <name>`: creates a branch.
- `git checkout -b <name>`: creates a branch and switches to it
  - same as `git branch <name>; git checkout <name>`
- `git merge <revision>`: merges into current branch.
- `git mergetool`: use a fancy tool to help resolve merge conflicts.
- `git rebase`: rebase set of patches onto a new base.

#### Remotes

- `git remote`: list remotes.
- `git remote add <name> <url>`: add a remote.
- `git push <remote> <local branch>:<remote branch>`: send objects to remote, and update remote reference.
- `git branch --set-upstream-to=<remote>/<remote branch>:` set up correspondence between local and remote branch.
- `git fetch`: retrieve object/references from a remote.
- `git pull`: same as `git fetch; git merge`.
- `git clone`: download repository from remote.
  
#### Undo

- `git commit --amend`: edit a commit's contents/message.
- `git reset HEAD <file>`: unstage a file.
- `git checkout -- <file>`: discard changes.
  
#### Advanced Git

- `git config`: Git is [highly customizable](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-config)
- `git clone --depth=1`: shallow clone, without entire version history.
- `git add -p`: interactive staging.
- `git rebase -i`: interactive rebasing.
- `git blame`: show who last edited which line.
- `git stash`: temporarily remove modifications to working directory.
- `git bisect`: binary search history(e.g. for regression.)
- `.gitignore`: [gitignore](https://git-scm.com/docs/gitignore) intentionally untracked files to ignore.
  
### Miscellaneous

- **GUIs** [GUIs](https://git-scm.com/downloads/guis)
- **Shell integration**: it's super handy to have a Git status as part of your shell prompt([zsh](https://github.com/olivierverdier/zsh-git-prompt), [bash](https://github.com/magicmonty/bash-git-prompt))
- **Editor integration**: [fugitive.vim](https://github.com/tpope/vim-fugitive) is the standard one for Vim.
- **Workflows**:
  [A successful Git branching model](https://nvie.com/posts/a-successful-git-branching-model/)
  [GitFlow considered harmful](https://www.endoflineblog.com/gitflow-considered-harmful)
  [Gitflow Workflow](https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/comparing-workflows/gitflow-workflow)

### Resources

- [Pro Git](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2)
- [Oh Shit, Git!?!](https://ohshitgit.com/): it is a short guide on how to recover from some common Git mistakes.
- [Git for Computer Scientists](https://eagain.net/articles/git-for-computer-scientists/): it is a short explanation of Git's data model.
- [Git from the Bottom Up](https://jwiegley.github.io/git-from-the-bottom-up/): it is a detailed explanation of Git's implementation details beyond just the data model, for the curious.
- [How to explain git in simple words?](https://xosh.org/explain-git-in-simple-words/)
- [Learn Git Branching](https://learngitbranching.js.org/?locale=zh_CN): is a browser-based game that teaches you Git.

### Exercises


